---
layout: post
title:  "The Biomedical Engineering Problem"
date:   2024-02-17 00:00:00 -0500
categories: Biomedical Engineering
---

After embarking on my college journey studying biomedical engineering (BME), I learned significantly more about this field than I could have ever known prior to college applications when I chose it as my major. And I believe this will be the case as I progress throughout my degree, meeting new people and learning new perspectives regarding the bioengineering space. However, this article is meant to be a summary of what I’ve learned so far about studying BME and an evaluation of the major. I also plan to discuss in a future article what career pathways it opens doors to.

## Biomedical Engineering Explained

Biomedical engineering isn’t a typical engineering field; it involves the application of skills from a variety of core engineering disciplines (i.e., mechanical, electrical, chemical, etc.) in biological and medical contexts. For instance, biomedical engineers apply mechanical and electrical engineering principles when developing medical devices/robots. They apply chemical engineering techniques (i.e. synthetic chemistry) when engineering new biomolecules (i.e. vaccines or drugs). They apply computer science skills (i.e. programming/data analysis) when working in computational biology (i.e. modeling an organ system). In essence, the major opens up pathways to a variety of careers across engineering disciplines that involve projects related to biomedicine.

## The Problem: Breadth v.s. Depth

The downside of this breadth is the lack of depth: most biomedical engineering undergraduate programs can’t adequately teach all the engineering skills of a mechanical, electrical, chemical, computer, etc. engineer. To combat this, biomedical engineering students gain a surface-level introduction to the principles of engineering, and electives/concentrations allow for students to pick specific engineering skills to further develop. For instance, one of Duke University’s BME degree’s elective course sequences is biomechanics and biomaterials, which furthers BME students’ mechanical and materials engineering skills through classes like biofluid mechanics and theoretical/applied polymer science (polymers are a major materials class within the materials science discipline). However, because electives/concentrations typically don’t contribute significantly to a degree’s core requirements, the aforementioned example ends up as a watered down mechanical & materials engineering double major with a biology minor. As a result, to truly gain the skills through meaningful coursework, many BME students have to go to graduate school to supplement their “incomplete” undergraduate engineering education.

And this relates to the second problem of the degree: due to the cram of engineering-related content, many biomedical engineering degrees aren’t consistent with the amount of biology/chemistry content taught and tend to cover only the essentials. For instance, Georgia Tech’s biomedical engineering program requires no biology department-run classes, but instead has 2 biomedical engineering classes & labs that cover the essential biosciences content (see this article for more about the GT BME degree). It also requires a “Survey of Organic Chemistry” class that condenses/simplifies content from Organic Chemistry I & II. As a result, for students trying to enter a more biology-focused discipline such as medicine or medical research (computational neuroscience, tissue engineering, etc.), the degree isn’t usually sufficient itself in preparing students.

Now returning to the original premise of the degree condensing content from various engineering disciplines, this becomes a problem for students trying to enter industry. To illustrate this with an example, considering just their curriculum a biomedical engineering student is less qualified than an electrical engineering student in bioelectronics, a mechanical engineering student in medical devices, a computer science student in bioinformatics, etc. This is again because the biomedical engineering curriculum covers a simplified version of each engineering discipline. And while there are some exceptions to this, generally this implies biomedical engineering students have to set themselves apart through unique extracurricular experiences for skill-building and stronger networking in order to enter industry. This is also why many biomedical engineering degree graduates are pigeonholed into higher education as there aren’t relevant industry positions they are uniquely qualified for.

For these reasons, biomedical engineering is typically seen as a “survey of engineering”, covering a simplified version of various engineering disciplines. While many career pathways are open through the degree, it requires either significantly harder work to attain them or commitment to graduate school.

## Addressing Possible Solutions

So considering this paradox, how do the top schools still have good student outcomes? Rephrased, how can BME work out? In general, many solutions involve adding increased depth into the curriculum through various approaches. Below are listed the primary methods top schools have taken for this.

- **Concentrations/Specializations**
> This is by-far the most popular solution as it requires students to gain in-depth knowledge and skills in a specific biomedical subfield, allowing them equal ground against skilled engineers of other majors. Concentrations are implemented in the programs at Duke University, Cornell University, University of Pennsylvania (Penn), & University of California, Berkeley. Analogous to concentrations, the concept of tracks (essentially specializations) are found in the programs from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, University of Michigan, University of Illinois, & Johns Hopkins University (alternatively called Focus Areas). Additionally, while some programs (i.e. Cornell) require students to take a concentration, others that don’t (i.e. Penn) typically have built-in electives for taking them regardless, incentivizing students to take them and enhance their degree.
- **Engineering Double Major/Minor**
> Another way to enhance the BME curriculum is to require a form of more formal engineering education within a specific traditional engineering field (i.e. mechanical, electrical, chemical, etc.). To do this, Carnegie Mellon University requires BME majors to double-major in other traditional engineering fields. Similarly, Duke has developed and streamlined their curriculum such that it includes plans to incentivize students to double major in other engineering degrees (i.e. ME, ECE, CEE, & CS). Alternatively, at Georgia Tech, double-majoring is unpopular/infeasible due to the high requirements with few overlaps across engineering degrees. Additionally, most traditional engineering degrees don’t have a minor program. As a result, to enhance the BME curriculum, Georgia Tech requires BME majors to take up either a certificate/minor, pre-health designation, or research option. Typically, the former is the most popular, with minors in CS (to enter biocomputing), robotics/industrial design (to enter medical devices/robotics), biology/chemistry/biochemistry (to enter biochemical research/engineering), & materials science/engineering (to enter biomaterials) demonstrating how the BME curriculum can be enhanced outside of double-majoring.
- **BME Minor/Alternative Options**
> As an added measure to the above method of supplementing the BME program with another engineering program, typically schools will have other pathways within their engineering department to enter specific BME subfields. For example, at Georgia Tech, students interested in biomaterials can major in materials science & engineering with a biomaterials concentration. Similarly, the electrical engineering degree has a bioengineering thread (essentially a concentration) for students interested in biosignal processing and electrophysiology. But besides these specialized programs (which vary school by school), the general concept of a BME minor is also popular, where students take a traditional engineering degree major and use the BME minor to take specialized bioengineering elective classes. This is by-far the most popular suggestion for students interested in BME, but not at a school where the BME curriculum is sufficient to prepare them as an engineer across disciplines.
- **Differentiated Degrees**
> Finally, one other alternative to enhancing the BME degree’s depth is to divide up the degree altogether into different specialized degrees. This is the approach Stanford University uniquely takes as, on paper, it has 3 BME-related degrees: biomechanical engineering (focused on medical devices/prosthetics), biomedical computation (focused on biocomputing & health data science/informatics), & bioengineering (likely focused on preparing a biology-focused, general engineering program). However, this isn’t extremely novel as it’s essentially making the concentrations under other BME degrees their own degree program.

## An Overlooked Solution: Reframing Career Goals
Every aspect of the analysis above made one critical implicit assumption: a BME’s career goals involved working in a sector favoring subject-matter experts (SMEs) such as medical robotics, medical research, biomedical informatics, etc. And as a result, the increased breadth/lack of depth of the degree logically hindered it’s career success. But this handicap is intrinsic to this assumption that success is correlated to becoming an SME; by reframing our career goals beyond this, there are plenty of other fields BMEs can enter that value breadth over depth, making BMEs more qualified than their more-specialized engineering counterparts. 

For instance, in fields like consulting and management, having a broader set of engineering knowledge may prove more valuable than a deeper one as much of the advanced engineering problem-solving is performed by the project’s engineers, while the consultant/manager can use their breadth of knowledge to solve the project’s high-level problems (i.e. component integration, budget/resource allocations, communication/planning, etc.). And this is even more prevalent for BMEs looking to run/manage personal ventures such as startups, where delegating the advanced tasks to hired engineers is the essence of managing and running a company.

This may sound all well and good: the BME degree is a watered down business degree with an engineering and biology focus. Except, this sounds very familiar to another program of study: industrial engineering. And just to define industrial engineering (because I’ve come to realize at Georgia Tech plenty of people don’t know what it is, including industrial engineers), it’s applying engineering principles to solve business-related problems such as supply chain management, operations research, financial engineering, etc. Essentially, replace the biology focus of a BME degree with more business/finance content, and you have an industrial engineering degree. In this frame of light, industrial engineering is an inherently better degree for entering consulting, management, finance, and other related “breadth-favoring” fields because the business/finance content is enhanced, replacing the biology focus which was of little practical use other than improving employability for solely bioengineering-related roles. Yet again the conclusion is that the biology focus under the BME degree is a hindrance to its competitiveness with other engineering programs as it takes away other valuable skills to be taught by the degree, whether that be advanced engineering skills or business/management/finance skills.

## Conclusion

So ultimately, universities have tried to mitigate the BME problem by adding depth to the curriculum in various ways, enhancing the curriculum along with the degree difficulty in order to improve employability and engineering skill set. And while numerous university case studies were detailed above, the purpose of this discussion wasn’t to praise these solutions as effective solutions; neither was it to demonstrate that BME is a degree that should be viewed as a modified business degree for entering non-technical goals. It was to emphasize the importance of passion and drive in the field of BME. Because without passion or drive for a subfield under BME, there’s no incentive for students to develop the specialized skill sets needed to make effective use of the degree and overcome the breadth problem. In contrast, having drive/passion will always provide avenues for students to develop their abilities and apply their degree, even if their university doesn’t have the most accessible pathways for degree enhancement.