---
layout: post
title:  "Maximizing the Transition to College"
date:   2024-02-21 00:00:00 -0500
categories: College Applications
---
Here are my top 5 tips to maximize the transition from high school to college:

- **Get College Credit**
> While during senior year, "senioritis" may cause you to fall behind in your classes and lose motivation to study, the value of college credits transferred from high-school is severely underlooked. Especially at public schools (which will accept them more widely than private schools), a lot of transferred credits can accelerate one's degree path, make semesters on average less credits (which generally corresponds to an easier schedule with more free time), and even provide a multitude of advantages while at college (i.e. at Georgia Tech, credits hours determine time tickets for course selection & on-campus housing). There are generally 2 ways to get credits: dual enrolling in a transferable class at another college or taking a credit validation test (i.e. AP, IB, a university-administered skip test like Georgia Tech's advanced standing exams (ASE), etc.) Taking a validation test is generally more cost effective than dual enrollment (but more risky on the chance you don't pass the test); both of these should be valued against the time, financial, & effort cost of taking the class while at college. Ultimately, senior year you shouldn't slack off in classes where possible credits will transfer to your degree as you're going to waste time in the future retaking that class if you can't get credit for it now (and the university version of the class will likely be harder and poorly administered). Additionally, always look out for ways to get more credit easily (like taking more AP/IB tests, skip testing at university, CLEP exams, etc.) as you never want to waste your valuable time in college learning things you already know.

- **Plan for College**
> This is an extension of the above point: beyond just setting yourself up for college, you should also have a plan coming in. For instance, having a 3-5 year plan for your classes each semester, a shortlist of clubs of interest with contact information, a set of professors you plan to converse with for research opportunities once you arrive on campus, etc. will all help you feel more on top of things once you get to college. At the moment, it may seem like there's way too much to plan and a lot of it will solve itself once you get on campus, but entering college without a plan generally results in you not maximizing all of the opportunities available for students. Figuring out how to game the system early is the best way to find the "path of least resistance" with the most yield in college. You don't want to end up in a situation taking hard classes that don't satisfy a degree requirement, missing deadlines for club applications, and struggling to get a research opportunity because most labs filled up.

- **Network**
> With regards to career development for those in majors that enter industry, starting networking early is never a bad decision. Networking is essential in the job market we are currently in, and while it may seem daunting starting it in high school, networking is a time and numbers game: the earlier and higher volume you do it, the more success you'll have sooner. The actual tasks of action executing this include could include making a LinkedIn (or other professional media) profile, building your network, connecting with people in the industry you want to work in (getting to know their work/perspectives and their advice on your aspirations/application), obtaining referrals, & applying to internships. Furthermore, beginning career development projects such as creating a personal website/portfolio are all things to do as soon as you can to increase your chances at networking success and career stability.

- **Build Life Skills**
> College will be a different atmosphere for most. For me personally, everything I did in the first month felt slower: I lost so much time accounting for new chores, walking to places, and other trivial but repetitive time commitments. Without your support system at home, you will develop the skills to be self-sufficient. However, by starting early before college, you reduce the burden on yourself to learn in college giving you a relative advantage over others still adjusting. Restated, by training yourself to become more self-sufficient (i.e. by doing your own laundry, cooking, cleaning, etc.) before college, the transition to college will be seamless. Now, there are 2 more points to be made regarding this: 1) it will seem time-taking and without benefit to want to accept more chore work/tasks (but consider the alternative having to go through this learning curve during the commitments of college instead) and 2) for a lot of people, their starting level of "self-sufficiency" will vary based on their household's typical operation (regardless, everyone end up at the same place in college requiring being almost completely self-sufficient).

- **Explore Interests**
> Finally, the time before college is the only guaranteed "break" without commitments you'll get before retirement. As a result, it's a perfect time to try new things and explore your interests before you go to college. Had I started this blog idea before college it may have ended up as a series of higher quality TikToks or YouTube videos. Getting out of your comfort zone early is perfect during  this risk-free environment/time of your life. Learn a new sport/game, language, music instrument, or you name it. Channel your motivation and energy into something you're actually interested in rather than whatever school subjects were forced on you for 18 years.
