---
layout: post
title:  "On Resume Formatting (+ My Template)"
date:   2024-03-03 00:00:00 -0500
categories: Career
---
Throughout my first semester at Georgia Tech, my eyes have been opened to the world of career development and the search for work. Over this period of time, I learned the importance of the resume/CV: a single document compiling the work product and expertise of an individual. And while there are plenty of online resources discussing the content of the resume (i.e. the popular XYZ formula by Google), here I want to discuss a more overlooked aspect of the resume: format.

Resume format is typically overlooked because it isn’t hard to find an online resume format to copy-paste your resume’s content in. Furthermore, many feel it’s trivial with new AI applicant tracking systems (ATS) that can’t digest the format and only digest content. But, major red flags in resume formatting can send the wrong signal to a recruiter (who will eventually see your resume even in the era of ATS) about your work ethic, which is the most unfortunate way to lose contention for a position. Rephrased, format isn’t hard to get right, but if it’s wrong it can be detrimental to a career search.

With regards to this on the college level, it’s very common to see resumes with small formatting errors like uneven spacing, inconsistent emphasis (bold/italics/underlines), date errors (between using unconventional formats to having unevenly-spaced dates that aren’t right-aligned), etc. A majority of these errors are because most students aren’t well-versed in maximizing the capabilities of typesetting tools to develop a consistent document format (i.e. not presetting headings/font settings/colors/etc.)

As a result, I’ve developed a [resume template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1g6jHmT-6L9_vq7BdJhqIdAKD17AcQB9vZHnhGXwiuKI/edit) that tries to combat the common formatting errors I’ve seen in reviewing resumes. This template was developed in Google Docs (arguably one of the most popular typesetting softwares for its portability and collaboratively) for ease of use. However, there are a couple fair warnings about its development and usage.

In particular, to combat the problem of not having both a left and right alignment of content on the same line (especially for dates/locations for experiences), this template uses section breaks with 2-column settings. These breaks can be viewed from the docs menu by selecting View, Show Non-Printing Characters. These section breaks allow you to edit content on the right side of the page with adaptive spacing adjustment (so no more spamming tab to get to the right side of the page, all the contents on the right side will remain at the same rightmost alignment regardless of content length). However, if the section characters are deleted in the process of adding content, the format will break and the easiest way to fix it if you aren’t versed in Docs formatting is to restore the document to it’s prior state and try adding the content in another manner (i.e. without deleting the line-end break character or copy-pasting in-line with the current content placeholders). This is my advice: if you are copy-pasting content, copy paste it between the brackets of the placeholder in the area and manually delete the brackets after. This use of sections/2-column settings also makes changing the number of experiences/projects/extracurricular items a little finicky; with regards to this, ensure when you are changing the number of items under each section, there are always 2 sections breaks (one above the experience heading line and a half-line below it) mimicking the view of the original template. And finally, with regards to changing font settings like the typeface, color, etc. working through the Docs styles menu is suggested but here deviation is typical due to the small size of the document and lack of a need for coherent font consistency.

So, I didn’t think I’d be able to write a common-app length essay on Google Docs formatting but here we are. Feel free to use the [template](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1g6jHmT-6L9_vq7BdJhqIdAKD17AcQB9vZHnhGXwiuKI/edit) if you are in need of a fresh format on a convenient typesetting platform, and I’m always happy to troubleshoot any issues.

Also for disclosure, this isn’t my current resume format as I’m currently experimenting with using Latex on overleaf; however, I have used a precursor to this format in the past that helped me develop this.